welcome to topcast and to my next
episode in my discussions of the
chapters in stephen pinker's book
rationality and today i'm up to chapter
five beliefs and evidence subtitled
bayesian reasoning
i spend much time thinking about and
looking into
what people are saying about bayesian
reasoning
it seems to be the
in vogue epistemology the way in which
some scientists some philosophers and
many members of the so-called
rationalist community
think about science and how it works
it's sometimes regarded as a philosophy
of science or an epistemology even this
bayesian reasoning
insofar as it is a method of reasoning
and we can talk about that it's just
logic like much reasoning happens to be
insofar as it's not used logically and
it often isn't
it purports to be a kind of souped-up
version of induction that
supposed way of generating hypotheses or
predictions from a run of observations
in the past which is presumed to just
continue in the future for no other
reason than well it's a pattern so why
shouldn't that pattern continue well
there's a whole bunch of reasons why not
to mention of course that prediction is
not the soul or even main purpose of
science nevertheless stephen pinker has
written a book on rationality and a core
component of this book and therefore his
understanding and what he wants to teach
people about what rationality is comes
down to whether or not we are good
bayesian reasoners this is in line with
philosophers like nick bostrom who also
implore us to be better bayesians this
is now de rigueur it is the culture
intellectual culture now we are supposed
to be better and better bayesians popper
was aware of bayesianism and he refuted
bayesianism in the same breath that he
refuted inductivism as a prelude to this
chapter let's just consult what papa
says in his piece titled epistemology
without a knowing subject
and of course popper's book objective
knowledge and papa's philosophy and
epistemology places at the center of our
rational reasonable understanding of
reality the fact that knowledge can be
objective
indeed there are species of so-called
subjective knowledge but they are the
exception to the much broader rule the
much much broader rule that what we're
looking for are good explanations and
those good explanations instantiate
objective knowledge we're after
objective knowledge pop is epistemology
critical rationalism popular in
epistemology call it what you will the
epistemology of genuine objective
knowledge objective knowledge being
knowledge which is not merely free of
bias but which it can which can itself
be represented in objects out there in
the objective world not merely
inside the subjective minds of people
all other alternatives all other
alternatives have at their heart
some amount of subjectivism how it comes
down to beliefs or knowledge comes down
to beliefs in other words the
objectivity of knowledge comes down to
whether or not your subjective beliefs
crack reality
but this is a problem
if we have a subjective criteria for
objectivity namely belief in your
credences how much credibility you place
upon particular claims that is purely
subjective then we've got a problem for
objective knowledge papa rejected all of
that popper argued for
an objective knowledge that could be
independent of what anyone thought or
believed about it or how probable they
thought it was and the modern variant
today known as bayesian epistemology
is just the same as the traditional kind
based upon beliefs and whether or not
those beliefs are justified justified as
true or probably true
let's read what poppy himself had to say
i'm reading from section 7.2 which is
titled probability theory in the book
objective knowledge page 141
epistemology without a knowing subject
and papa writes quote nowhere has the
subjectivist epistemology a stronger
hold than in the field of the calculus
of probability this calculus is a
generalization of boolean algebra and
thus of the logic of propositions it is
still widely interpreted in a subjective
sense as a calculus of ignorance or of
uncertain subjective knowledge but this
amounts to interpreting boolean algebra
including the calculus of propositions
as a calculus of certain knowledge of
certain knowledge in the subjective
sense this is a consequence which few
bayesians as the adherents of the
subjective interpretation of the
probability calculus now call themselves
will cherish
this subjective interpretation of the
probability calculus i have combated for
33 years fundamentally it springs from
the same epistemic philosophy which
attributes to the statement i know that
snow is white a greater epistemic
dignity then to the statement snow is
white
end quote papa goes on from there
one other thing before i begin and i'll
be coming back to other refutations of
the view of rationality that pink
presents here in this chapter and the
view of reasoning that pinker presents
in this chapter but one thing needs to
be said bayez's theorem is a theorem it
is a correct mathematical formulae it
allows one to calculate certain stuff it
simply isn't a basis for epistemology it
isn't a basis for reasoning broadly and
it's certainly no basis for a philosophy
of science how science actually works
we'll come to that but i just wanted to
say up front that i've got no problem
with the theorem i've written an article
on my website titled bayesian
epistemology you can search for that on
google based in epistemology brett hall
and it will bring up valid uses of bayes
theorem
and then all the invalid ways in which
it is often wheeled out to try and
justify as true certain ideas but let's
begin pinker's chapter here
beliefs and evidence
and he quotes carl sagan at the
beginning
quote
extraordinary claims require
extraordinary evidence and it goes on
quote reading pinker
a heartening exception to the disdain
for reason in so much of our online
discourse is the rise of a rationality
community whose members strive to be
less wrong by compensating for their
cognitive biases and embracing standards
of critical thinking and epistemic
humility the introduction to one of
their online tutorials can serve as an
introduction to the subject of this
chapter and then pinker goes on to quote
the less wrong people from the less
wrong website bay's rule or bayes
theorem is the law of probability
governing the strength of evidence the
rule saying how much to revise our
probabilities change our minds when we
learn a new fact or observe new evidence
you may want to learn about bazer's rule
if you are a professional who uses
statistics such as a scientist or doctor
a computer programmer working in machine
learning a human being
yes a human being
many rationalists believe bay's rule is
among the normative models that are most
frequently flouted in everyday reasoning
and which if better appreciated could
add the biggest kick to public
rationality in recent decades bayesian
thinking has skyrocketed in prominence
in every scientific field though few lay
people can name or explain it they have
felt its influence in the trendy term
priors which refers to one of the
variables in the theorem
end quote pausing there just my
reflection on that bit
there's a few things to
notice here one is that it is said that
bayes's theorem can be used to revise
our probabilities
and then in brackets after revise our
probabilities is written the phrase
change our minds in other words to
change your mind is to revise your
probability
this seems to be
if we're arguing the case for whether or
not a bayesian epistemology is a
rational way of thinking it would seem
to beg the question but of course in
this chapter and throughout the book
pinker is not really arguing for bazer's
theorem he's not really arguing for
bayesian epistemology he's merely
assuming it's true
and assuming the fundamental reality of
probability as a description of physical
reality even though we know it's false
see my last exploration of the last
chapter of pinker's book for more on
that
okay now
pink is about to go on with
what i would say is the
valid deployment of basis theorem
and this is where we have a whole bunch
of knowns in order to calculate another
known so when you know certain stuff
then you can calculate something as
pinker says quote
a paradigm case of bayesian reasoning is
medical diagnosis suppose that the
prevalence of breast cancer in the
population of women is one percent
suppose that the sensitivity of a breast
cancer test its true positive rate is 90
suppose that its false positive rate is
a woman tests positive what is the
chance that she has the disease the most
popular answer from a sample of doctors
given these numbers ranged from 80 to 90
percent
bazer's rule allows you to calculate the
correct answer nine percent that's right
the professionals whom we entrust with
our lives flood the basic test of
interpreting a medical test and not by a
bit
they think there's almost a 90 chance
she has cancer whereas in reality
there's a 90 chance she doesn't end
quote
now although this is a valid
deployment of bayes's theorem using
those numbers
let's just take it a little bit more
seriously we're told there
that
in fact this particular woman
although she's told she has a 90 chance
of that she has cancer in reality
there's a 90 percent chance that she
doesn't have cancer
but
what can that mean for an individual
what can it mean taken seriously
that you have a 90 percent chance of not
having cancer
after all in reality
you either have cancer or you don't have
cancer what is this betting on things
now there might be good reasons why a
doctor needs to make a bet in some
situations
this is when he or she literally does
not know does not know
what kind of treatment the patient needs
doesn't know perhaps doesn't have a good
theory we would say a good explanation
as to whether or not that particular
tumor is cancerous so why not give the
chemotherapy in that case well
maybe the chemotherapy is going to cause
damage in which case we're going to have
to have a serious conversation between
the doctor and the patient
and in that case
maybe something like basic serum might
might i say help but we should be
looking for a good explanation and in
modern medicine today doctors can do
lots and lots of tests to really
constrain things to really find out is
that tumor going to be cancerous or not
and so we can find out we can have a
good explanation yes you have cancer
it's not 90 having cancer you have
cancer or you don't have cancer one or
the other there are rare edge cases
where
doctors don't know they don't know they
don't have a good explanation
and in those cases maybe bazel's theorem
might be deployed but even then in those
very very rare cases this is what we
have second opinions for other
techniques other experts to consult
different ways of approaching the
problem so that we can eventually
hopefully get a good explanation but
this is the rare rare situation and the
problem is that this
reasonably valid deployment of bayes's
theorem even where by the way there's no
such thing as having 90 chance of cancer
either you've got it or you don't
putting that aside
generalizing this entire case this
particular situation to the rest of
science to fundamental science to
physical theories to chemistry and
anywhere else is wrong it's simply wrong
we aren't in this situation rather a lot
of the time
medical professionals can look up
statistics for how accurate a particular
medical test happens to be medical
professionals can look up the incidence
of particular diseases and so these
things can sort of be put into a formula
perhaps i don't know of any doctor who
actually does this though and i've
spoken to a couple about it they don't
know bayes's theorem from a hat
what they do is use evidence in the same
way that a scientist tends to use
evidence they might have competing
theories they then go out to look for
the crucial bit of evidence the crucial
test the experimental result which rules
out all of the theories that they might
have in favor of one leaving one
standing that's the theory they go with
that's the explanation they rely upon in
order to treat or not treat a particular
patient let's keep going with what
pinker says here okay you've just been
told either you've got a 90 chance of
cancer or 90 chance of not having cancer
pinker says imagine your emotional
reaction upon hearing one figure or the
other and consider how you would weigh
your options in response that's why you
a human being want to learn about
bazel's theorem
ends quote pausing there
i
would want to know
how the doctor arrived at that ninety
percent number
precisely now if they're just pulling it
out of the air because it's a hunch and
by the way we're going to get to this
idea that priors that are employed in
basis theorem in various other places in
risk analysis in the insurance industry
for example really are plucked out of
the air to a certain extent now there
are some situations where statistics are
employed but there are also situations
where it is just a so-called subject
matter expert who is coming up with the
prior probability they're guessing at
what it is they're making it up if the
doctor says you've got a 90 chance of
having cancer i want to know where the
90 came from on what basis is that guess
being made i want to know whether i've
got cancer or not
and therefore what the treatment for the
tumor i've got that's malignant is going
to be
and if the tumor is not malignant then
that's a whole other conversation if i
don't have cancer well happy days but
this idea of 90 chance where does that
come from what if it was 50 chance we're
flipping a coin now this isn't how
medicine works much less the rest of
science theories
either are correct or they're not not 90
correct or 90
likely of being correct that's not how
it works
strictly speaking they're all false they
contain misconceptions but they can be
useful in solving a particular problem
especially in medicine but i don't want
to focus on medicine here because we're
considering rationality more broadly
medicine really is an edge case here and
it's why it's brought up so often in
talking about basis theorem because we
can employ precise numbers there in
order to surprise the learner with the
answer
the convenient set of numbers are often
deployed so that people can be be shown
for example right there that even if a
breast cancer test
the true positive
rate of accuracy is 90
and you test positive your chance of
having cancer can still be nine percent
okay so we've made that point that's a
particular error that can be made okay
so
we've learned that but is that that is
in learning that and being perhaps
shocked the first time you ever
encounter that particular thing should
that completely change the way in which
you reason about science broadly
no it shouldn't let's keep going pinker
writes quote
risky decision making requires both
assessing the odds do i have cancer and
weighing the consequences of each choice
if i do nothing and have cancer i could
die if i undergo surgery and don't have
cancer i will suffer needless pain and
disfigurement in chapters 6 and 7 we'll
explore how best to make consequential
decisions when we know the probabilities
but the starting point must be the
probabilities themselves given the
evidence how likely is it that some
state of affairs is true end quote and
pausing there all right now don't worry
i'm not going to read this entire
chapter otherwise i will be pausing at
every single uh paragraph here because
there's much to object to but there
we've just been told that coming up in
chapter six and seven the subsequent
chapters in the next chapters we're told
we'll explore how to best make
consequential decisions when we know the
probabilities
know the probabilities now it doesn't
matter whether you interpret no there in
the way that i guess pinker normally
would and other people normally would
which is to be certain of or in the
popularian sense of having a good
explanation of but the thing is when do
we know the probabilities when can we
know the probabilities well chapter 6
and chapter 7 tell us so i skipped ahead
there
and i read it for you so let me spoil it
spoiler alert for chapter six and seven
when do you know the probabilities we
rarely do after all but as pinker and i
would basically agree
you know the probabilities for the case
of gambling games of chance winning the
lottery for example that's the example
that's used
in chapter six and throughout chapter
six you know the probabilities in cases
like gambling but even there
we would have to say following david
deutscher's work on this following what
i've said in previous podcasts even
there
it's not simply not true
that physically speaking that the
probabilities quoted four games of
chance are literally true given what we
know about quantum theory for example
playing craps rolling dice in other
words okay you roll one dice what's the
chance that it's going to come up by two
well there are six sides to the dice so
there's a one in six chance well not
exactly not exactly and if you do a long
run of rolling dices what you will find
is that in fact it's not precisely that
every one in six rolls comes up two it
only approximately does but that's what
the probability calculus says it says
that these things should be distributed
exactly should be exactly one and six so
the chance of rolling a two is exactly
one in six but on what basis a priori
well a priori the things made out of
physical matter and physical matter
obeys quantum laws and quantum laws are
not probabilistic and indeed allow for
something other than numbers one through
to six to turn up on that die smaller
chances that may be
small measure of universes though that
may be and by the way
this again is begging the question it's
begging the question if you go to
chapter six
where pink is talking about when we know
what's it what the probabilities are for
particular situations and he falls back
on games of chance the very reason that
probability was invented in the first
place that it approximates how games of
chance behave how flipping coins works
how drawing cards from decks work and so
on and so forth that's where probability
works why should that be generalizable
to the rest of rationality why should
that be generalizable to the way that
science
fundamentally works we aren't told we're
just told here's a situation where we
know the probabilities are the chance of
drawing the ace of spades out of a
typical standard deck is 1 in 52.
therefore we can do calculations in
games of chance using the probability
calculus therefore it works in this very
niche very parochial unusual situation
so let's generalize it to the rest of
rationality no
that's not rational that's unreasonable
especially when as i keep underscoring
the probability calculus doesn't apply
anyway to games of chance strictly
speaking but even if it did that's no
reason to then generalize it to the rest
of reality especially where the rest of
reality is inherently unpredictable you
don't know the odds what are the odds of
a nuclear explosion within the next 100
years
don't know
what are the odds of a thunderstorm
tomorrow
don't know what we have are good
explanations or not things don't
probably happen they happen or they
don't happen
that's that one of the challenges of
this chapter is going to be talking
about the theorem without actually
mentioning the theorem itself
so i'll read through the section that
pinker employs that tries to describe
what the theorem is but then i'll go to
one of my own blog posts and read a
brief part of that which tries to put it
in plain english i don't want to
concentrate on calculations with the
theorem so much my blog post on bayesian
epistemology or pinker's original
chapter on this can be consulted for
that but what pink it does say is this
quote for all the scariness of the word
theorem bazel's rule is rather simple
and as we will see at the end of the
chapter it can be made gut level
intuitive the great insight of the
reverend thomas bayes 1701 to 1761 was
that the degree of belief in a
hypothesis may be quantified as a
probability this is the subjectivist
meaning of probability that we met in
the last chapter call it prob hypothesis
the probability of a hypothesis that is
our degree of credence that it is true
in the case of medical diagnosis the
hypothesis is that the patient has the
disease
end quote okay so just just notice that
that again so the chance of a particular
patient having the disease
this is based upon the idea that well
there's a certain rate of cancer within
a given population but are you
representative of that particular
population that's one thing now whether
or not it works in medicine we can
debate but this has no analog
anywhere else
how do we figure out
what the probability of a hypothesis
being true is our degree of credence is
in any other area especially when it
comes to philosophy of science the way
in which science works
for example we have what is called the
standard model of particle physics now
the standard model of particle physics
what would we assign our degree of
credence to be that it is true i don't
know you could ask 10 different particle
physicists but do they know according to
our best epistemology we should presume
it contains misconceptions so strictly
speaking it's false we should assign a
credence of zero to it because we
shouldn't believe our theories we
shouldn't believe any particular good
explanation as good as it is it tracks
reality in some way it describes reality
it explains reality but it also gets
some things wrong and this is why we
shouldn't believe our theories we should
expect them to be improved superseded
overturned by something better in the
future and it's true of every single
scientific theory we have so
automatically at the very first hurdle
of explaining this theorem
we're already automatically knocking it
out of the park in terms of being a
possible philosophy of science because
there's no way of assigning the
probability that a particular theory is
true a particular hypothesis is true any
existing pit of knowledge is true we
don't know we don't know ahead of time
whether or not that bit of knowledge is
going to be overturned in the future we
should expect it to be and so therefore
we should expect that all such
probabilities are zero and so therefore
if we're starting to put zero into our
equation we're going to get zero at the
end as well so it's a pointless equation
for that purpose for that purpose okay
pinker goes on to explain all the other
different parts of the equation i'll put
the equation on the screen if you have
to be watching this but basically this
is an audio episode so you don't need to
you can google bayes theorem and look up
what it is the way in which pinker
describes the rule is
he writes it down as prob hypothesis
given the data is equal to prob
hypothesis multiplied by proper the data
given the hypothesis all divided by
probably the data okay where prob means
probability obviously pinker goes on to
say what does this mean recall that prob
hypothesis given the data the expression
on the left hand side is the posterior
probability our updated credence in the
hypothesis after we've looked at the
evidence this could be our confidence in
a disease diagnosis after we've seen the
test results
end quote okay
there are lots of ways to talk about
what is called bayesian reasoning and
some things that are
sometimes called bayesian reasoning i
would just say are logic as i've already
hinted at it's just a use of logic for
example you get up in the morning all
the curtains are drawn you can't see
outside but when you went to bed last
night you remember the last thing that
was said by the weather person on the
news as you switched it off
they said the chance of rain tomorrow is
so you've had your shower you've had
your breakfast you're in a rush and
you're heading downstairs
and
you're just about to leave
when you decide should i take that
umbrella or not
well given no information whatsoever
you can't know whether or not it's going
to rain when you get outside or not
but you remember that last night the
weather person set a 95 chance of rain
so that is information so you should
update your probability it's not a
random 50 50 chance now of taking the
umbrella or not it seems to have jumped
perhaps to 95 percent perhaps you
endorse what the weather person says so
you grab the umbrella but then you
remember aha you were watching a repeat
of a television show that you recorded
last week and in fact that news report
that's a week old so now do you put the
umbrella back down again because once
more new information it's a week old
weather report it doesn't apply today
well you could run downstairs and have a
look outside and if you look outside and
you see it's not raining but there are
rain clouds now you've got new
information again okay so this entire
way of talking sometimes people label
this as bayesian reasoning i would say
what you're doing is you're just coming
up with conjectures and you're ruling
them out given certain evidence but you
don't really have a good explanation and
in particular you don't know whether
it's going to rain or not and so you
have to decide for yourself is it more
inconvenient to carry the umbrella or
not so that's one thing whether or not
you call that bayesian reasoning or not
i don't know i don't think the label
really matters but what you're not doing
really is actually calculating you're
not actually using bases theorem but in
so far as your reasoning
whether you call it logic it's a simple
logic or bayesian reasoning it doesn't
matter now on my website i'm just going
to read
a section where i describe
what i say is basis theorem in plain
english using an example the medical
example again people like to use
medicine for this okay let's say
you're sitting at home and you see a
news report
and the news report is about this
tropical virus called the zika virus
which is common in brazil or more common
in brazil than what it is in other
countries around the world let's say
you're watching the news report and
they're reporting the symptoms and
you're a bit of a hypochondriac so you
think i've got some of those symptoms
so you rush off to your local doctor to
get tested look says the doctor don't
worry
zika is actually really rare there's
lots of media hype of all the people who
come back from brazil only about 1 in 10
000 of them will actually have the virus
but you're in luck to put your mind at
ease we've got a test that is 99
accurate and it gives instant results so
let's get this over and done with right
now so you can go home confident in the
knowledge about whether you are indeed
infected or not that sounds promising of
course you're going to immediately get
the test done the blood's taken it's run
through a computer but the screen
flashes red
it's a positive test oh no you're
infected
well
not so fast are you really infected the
test after all is not perfect in fact
it's wrong one percent of the time the
doctor says it's 99 accurate but what
they really mean is 99 of the time
positive results are really positive and
negative results are actually negative
in other words the doctor implicitly
gives you the rate of false positive and
false negative which are both one
percent in this case everything turns on
other information
outside of the test
you're getting tested based upon
symptoms maybe it's a high fever maybe
it's a cough i don't know what the
symptoms for zika virus are but there
are
thousands of things that can probably
give you those symptoms why you would
immediately jump to i've got the zika
virus who knows you were just watching a
media report about it a news story if
you've just come back from brazil that's
one thing if you spent the last six
months in antarctica that's another what
i write on this is quoting myself
given the chance of you being infected
with zika is one in ten thousand if
you've been to brazil then if you have
now we want to know what is the chance
given you've been to brazil and you have
tested positive on a test that's 99
accurate it's not just 99 though still
because
if you've never been to brazil if you've
been living in isolation in antarctica
for the last two years with little
outside contact and someone test you for
zika and you test positive on a test
that's 99 accurate what's the best
explanation well the best explanation is
it's a false positive because the
chances of getting zika while you're in
antarctica in isolation are basically
zero one in a trillion or something and
that is supposed to be a form of
bayesian reasoning that way of thinking
about things you need these
prior probabilities to be updated with
new information but as i say this is
kind of just logic it's ruling out its
modus tollens it's falsification
refutation of a
worse theory in favor of a better
explanation of what's going on simple
logic no need to actually do
calculations let's go back to pinker
pinker translates basis theorem into
simple english so he says
one way of writing it he says is bazel's
rule can become
posterior probability equals prior
probability multiplied by the likelihood
of the data all divided by the
commonness of the data then he goes on
to say translated into english it
becomes our credence in a hypothesis
after looking at the evidence should be
our prior credence in the hypothesis
multiplied by how likely the evidence
would be if the hypothesis is true
scaled by how common that evidence is
across the board and translated into
common sense it works like this
now that you've seen the evidence how
much should you believe the idea first
believe it more if the idea was well
supported credible or plausible to start
with if it has a high prior the first
term in the numerator end quote okay so
clearly i have difficulty with all of
that because
well we shouldn't be believing ideas we
shouldn't be believing theories what we
should be do is relying upon our best
explanations of the world and either
we've got a good explanation or we don't
have a good explanation in which case we
either know something or we don't know
something and pretending to know
something when we don't know something
and assigning it a random number which
is a probability is not a rational thing
to do when we are ignorant we should
admit we do not know something
especially when making claims about the
future if you don't know you don't know
and you should say you don't know
don't say what's going to happen is x y
and z in the next five years you don't
know you're prophesying it doesn't
matter if you've got basis here and
behind you you don't know what new
knowledge is going to be created and yet
this is what bayesian inference
generation is all about bayesian
reasoning is often about unfortunately
it is not rational it shouldn't be a
part of rationality broadly speaking it
is a tiny quirky little formula that can
be used with the probability calculus
which we already know does not track
physical reality we've talked about that
before okay let's
continue i'm skipping quite a lot of the
the chapter and just diving into areas
of interest but pika goes on to write a
section about well kahneman and versky
and remember these guys are the ones who
invented behavioral economics they won a
nobel prize for their work in
trying to understand how people go about
making economic decisions and so there's
a section
titled or sub-section or other titled
base rate neglect and the
representativeness heuristic
and
here pinker writes
kahneman and versky singled out a major
ineptitude in our bayesian reasoning we
neglect the base rate which is usually
the best estimate of the prior
probability in the medical diagnosis
problem
our heads are turned by the positive
result the likelihood and we forget
about how rare the disease is in the
population the prior okay end quote now
this again just underscores what i was
saying before these kind of things you
know the the how
frequent are particular diseases in the
population which is called the prior
that can be well studied in epidemiology
it can be well constrained we can have a
good understanding of it a good
explanation in other words allows us to
derive numbers like this it's known but
how well known is the prior probability
of modern particle physics being correct
or string theory possibly being correct
or
name your theory the theory of tectonics
when it comes to geology and if we do
have evidence that doesn't agree with
one of these theories what then do we
adjust our belief in the theory which we
shouldn't believe anyway if so by how
much what if the experiment is wrong
this is of course the jew home quine
thesis the idea that when we get an
experimental result that disagrees with
a particular theory we can't know at
that time what's going on could it be
the experiment that's at fault or could
it be the theory absent another theory
that can go about explaining the
problematic result we've got a problem
that we've literally got a problem we
don't know what to do we don't know how
to understand this result but what we
don't go doing is throwing out our
theory we don't refute our theory nor do
we update our probability in the theory
because again by how much and why are we
believing the theory anyway pinker goes
on to say quote the duo kahneman
adversky went further and suggested we
don't engage in bayesian reasoning at
all
instead we judge the probability that an
instance belongs to a category by how
representative it is how similar it is
to the prototype or stereotype of the
category which we mentally represent as
a fuzzy family with its criss-crossing
resemblances a cancer patient typically
gets a positive diagnosis how common the
cancer is and how common a positive
diagnosis is never enters our minds
horses zebras who cares like the
availability heuristic from the
preceding chapter the representativeness
heuristic is a rule of thumb the brain
deploys in lieu of doing the math
zversky and kahneman demonstrated base
rate neglect in the lab by telling
people about a hit and run accident by a
taxi late at night in a city with two
cab companies green taxi which owns 85
of the cabs and blue taxi which owns 15
those are the base rates and hence the
price an eyewitness identified the cab
as blue and tests showed that he
correctly identified colors at night
eighty percent of the time that is the
likelihood of the data namely his
testimony given the cab's actual color
what is the probability that the cab
involved in the accident was blue the
correct answer according to bayes rule
is 0.41 the median answer was 0.8 almost
twice as high respondents took the
likelihood too seriously pretty much at
face value and downplayed the base rate
end quote pausing there and let's have a
closer look at what's going on here
is this reasoning at all what situations
would we find in real life that could be
modeled by something like that that's a
very abstract
manufactured artificial situation where
the numbers are provided
what goes on in real life a hit and runs
happened and there are two taxi
companies and we know it was a taxi and
we've only got one eyewitness and the
police come along and well what do they
do well they gather a heck of a lot more
evidence than just what's going on there
these days of course we've got we've got
cameras inside of all of the cabs so we
do know what's going on this is the real
limitation of bays we can't apply it to
real life
here we assume all else is being equal
between these green and blue taxi
companies maybe the police know
something we don't when they turn up
perhaps they know that one company is
notorious for employing poorly skilled
drivers or is lacks with allowing
drivers to drive while they're sleepy
who knows
again
this kind of question
investigating people's capacity to
reason in this way
it's like an algebra test more than
anything else or a geometry test it's a
lot of people forget their high school
mathematics but if they can't tell you
whether a particular triad is
pythagorean or not or if they can't
remember the definition of the sign rule
let's say is that a problem for their
reasoning i don't think so i don't think
trigonometry is necessarily required to
reason your way
through life
except for particular people the same is
true here because of the situation in
which you would validly be able to apply
bayes theorem it would have to be very
very artificial like this
and if it was the case that you needed
to do this well that's what a
mathematician is for they can be
employed to do this kind of thing but
the average person doesn't need to
reason in this way
who is it that needs to know exactly
aside from people just being tested as a
proxy for their so-called intelligence
or rationality but it's just a rule
people can learn
once explain to them what the error is
if you yourself might have made the
error in thinking that one taxi company
was going to be more likely than the
other one in fact it's a reverse you
only need to be given a couple of these
examples and then you understand the
error of your ways
and you'll make the right guess in the
future it's just something to learn but
again how useful is it after all the
application of this particular thing to
real life doesn't hold in almost any
situation much less in trying to figure
out which scientific theory is the best
explanation of a given phenomena it's a
curious way in which some of these
little puzzles these little mathematical
puzzles are employed in a book like this
almost to make people feel a little
silly let's read on a quote pinker
writes one of the symptoms of base rate
neglect in the world is hypochondria who
among us hasn't worried we have
alzheimer's after a memory lapse or an
exotic cancer when we have an ache or a
pain another is medical scaremongering a
friend of mine suffered an interlude of
panic when a doctor saw her preschool
daughter twitch and suggested the child
had tourette's syndrome once she
collected herself she thought it through
like a bayesian realise that twitches
are common and tourette's rare and calm
back down while giving the doctor a
piece of her mind about his statistical
innumeracy end quote
[Laughter]
yes so there's a lot of rudeness going
on there or not who knows maybe
this particular doctor was a very caring
person who saw the preschool taught a
twitch and you know thought well i care
about this person let me suggest the
child has tourette's syndrome now it
goes on to say that this is an unlikely
conclusion to reach but what does the
mother do
gives the doctor a piece of her mind
about his statistical numeracy but why
should the doctor turn around and
give her a piece of his mind about her
anatomical innumeracy
i don't know but giving people pieces of
your mind probably not a good heuristic
in order to be rational okay pinker goes
on about more about this base rate
neglected stuff in um the next section
and how it
tends to breed certain kinds of
stereotypical thinking or
generalizations about people which is
already mentioned previously in the book
i mean
the first example he uses makes the
point and he makes the uses
and he goes over many many more examples
as well let's just do his first example
and we'll skip over the rest
he says quote consider penelope a
college student described by her friends
as impractical and sensitive she has
traveled in europe and speaks french and
italian fluently her career plans are
uncertain but she's a talented
calligrapher and wrote a sonnet for her
boyfriend as a birthday present which do
you think is penelope's major psychology
or art history
art history of course oh really might it
be a wee bit relevant that 13 of college
students major in psychology but only
0.08
major in art history and a balance of
150 to 1 end quote
okay so yes and there are more examples
like this so people are stereotyping but
again
who's really making these calculations
who's really being asked these questions
why are they being asked these questions
what is going on
yes there is
still there are stereotypes sometimes
they're damaging sometimes it leads to
racism sometimes that can be dangerous
this might be over egging basis theorem
just a little okay so i'm going to skip
over um more of that and we'll pick it
up where pinker writes he writes a news
section
titled priors in science and the revenge
of the textbooks quote a neglect of base
rates is a special case of our neglect
of prize the vital albe is more nebulous
concept of how much credence we should
give a hypothesis before we look at the
evidence
end quote okay yes i'm going to have to
pause there because
what do we do under
regular epistemology critical
rationalist epistemology error
correction and so on
we just ask
is this thing a good explanation or not
why are we even generating hypotheses in
the first place what's this situation
the context really matters a lot in any
case assigning a number to the
probability of a given hypothesis at
that point is pure guesswork
pure
guesswork
wild guest work can i emphasize that
anymore if we have no other information
and we've come up with 10 different
hypotheses
then how do we assign probabilities to
any of them is it just 10 percent each
until the evidence comes in and when the
evidence does come in and conforms to
only one of those it's consistent with
only one of those do we reject all the
other nine is that what's really going
on is that not conjecture and reputation
i have been speaking to people about
this i have been reading about this and
the best that i can figure is that in
many of these situations where people
claim to be bayesian reasoning they come
up with their priors by guessing they
are consulted as subject matter experts
experts in the relevant area and how do
those subject matter experts come up
with their prize they guess they
generate them from their feelings it's a
purely subjective way of arriving at
this supposedly objective number plugged
into this supposedly objective theorem
but it begins in guesswork so it's only
going to produce guesswork now of course
we are in theory updating with evidence
but in real life what really goes on not
nothing quite like that nothing quite so
reasonable indeed pinker goes on to say
in the next sentence quote
now believing in something before you
look at the evidence may seem like the
epitome of irrationality isn't that what
we disdain as prejudice bias dogma
orthodoxy preconceived notions but prior
credence is simply the fallible
knowledge accumulated from all our
experience in the past
end quote is it indeed well this reminds
me of david deutsch's parable of the
calendar in 1999 i think it's in the
fabric of reality never before had his
experience in the past been of a
calendar whose year began with a 2-0 and
yet here he was astonishingly on
december 31st
1999 able to predict that within 24
hours he would be seeing calendars
everywhere beginning with a 20. how
strange given that none of his
accumulated experience from the past
could possibly have informed him that
calendars everywhere should indeed begin
with two zeros because he hadn't seen
that before but he knew it from a good
explanation of what was going on in
reality that's what's going on pinker
goes on to say indeed the posterior
probability from one round of looking at
evidence can supply the prior
probability for the next round a cycle
called bayesian updating it's simply the
mindset of someone who wasn't born
yesterday end quote
yes and no
i mean again people aren't routinely
using bae's theorem so whether you're
born yesterday or not you're not
updating your priors in this way you're
discarding theories guessed based on
whether or not they can explain the
evidence before you or not
and if they can't then you reject the
explanation
so it's not so much the mindset of
someone who wasn't born yesterday it's
the mindset
of someone with explanations
they may be good explanations or they
may be inexplicit intuitions skills or
talents learned over time from knowing
how to do certain things they can give
you hints but the most important thing
is whether or not a person has a good
explanation or not in which case they
know something or they don't know
something and then if the evidence comes
along and it's not consistent with what
they know they've got a problem and they
have to resolve the problem in some way
by coming up with a new theory that
explains the evidence so then you've
solved your problem or if you can't come
up with a theory and you've got this
problem well you just continue with the
problem there's no point updating all
these different hypotheses and waiting
that doesn't happen in real life no
one's doing that who's pulling out their
pocket calculator and figuring out the
prior probability of things whether in
day-to-day life or indeed in science
with hypotheses as i emphasize on this
podcast all the time it is so rare to
have multiple hypotheses
hypotheses in this case is coming up
with an explanation of a phenomenon
that's really really hard that's the
creative part of science it's not easy
this idea that we're going to have
multiples of a given hypothesis is
simply wrong
look at a mystery in science right now
what is dark energy what is driving the
accelerated expansion the universe this
thing has been around this phenomenon
has been around for over 20 years at
this point 25 years now we don't have a
whole bunch of good hypotheses that we
can wait with increasing evidence
we just don't have any
forget about
waiting different hypotheses to bet on
one we don't have any and insofar as we
do as people put forward certain
theories they don't really account for
what's going on the best physical
theories we have are ruled out by other
observations that we have in physical
reality it's a problem a mystery so is
true of any other time we have
problematic observations in science
that's how we make progress by
trying to come up with new explanations
the really hard part that's going to
solve the problem we don't have
multiples of them
okay let's get going pinker goes on to
say for fallible knowers in a chancy
world justified belief cannot be equated
with the last fact you came across as
francis crick liked to say any theory
that can account for all the facts is
wrong because some of the facts are
wrong this is why it is reasonable to be
skeptical of claims for miracles
astrology homeopathy telepathy and other
paranormal phenomena even when some
eyewitness or laboratory study claims to
show it end quote well of course i'd
prefer to put that the reason why we
should be skeptical of claims for
miracles astrology homeopathy etc is
that in all those cases when you look
closely enough there's either no
explanation at all or a bad explanation
an explanation that contradicts what we
already know in science
uh
physical laws in particular and so this
is how we know okay this is in the
beginning affinity it's in the fabric of
reality i talk about it on here often if
we have the paranormal being invoked the
supernatural being invoked we can reject
it because it's a bad explanation never
mind doing linguistic gymnastics with
rationality and bayes theorem it's a bad
explanation or it contradicts some law
of physics we don't need to go down that
road we can reject things without ever
talking about the evidence because it's
just a bad explanation so anyway a few
paragraphs
follow this in fact a few pages
testifying to how bayesian reasoning can
be used so that we don't believe in
miracles
okay so so we shouldn't believe in
miracles because base theorem or
something like that so i'm going to skip
over these we shouldn't believe in
miracles because it's a bad explanation
okay you can any time you observe
something you can't explain you can just
say miracle okay so it's an all-purpose
explanation which means it explains
nothing but i'd like to know from a
bayesian
under what conditions our beliefs are
ever set to exactly zero probability
whereas a critical rationalist can rule
out a particular
thing a particular phenomenon as being a
bad explanation and not happening
because it contravenes the laws of
physics can a bayesian ever exactly do
that or must there always be a non-zero
chance that some theory could be true if
so
how do we figure out what that non-zero
probability is and if it is a zero
probability of miracles on what basis on
what basis
okay pinker then
writes more about
miracles and esp types type stuff
but then gets to the replication crisis
in psychology
and he defends his own field against the
idea that it's a crisis but the question
does remain
you know why
do bad things get published in
psychology journals why do they get
published anywhere well of course people
are error-prone there can be no
error-free process in fact that's why
one would hope journals exist in the
first place to weed out the errors so
it's kind of to be expected that now and
again
articles will be published
that aren't true that's the purpose at
least ostensibly one of the purposes and
of course it backfires now and again by
not publishing the good stuff because it
doesn't conform with the existing stuff
this is the problem with journals
so let me read the story that
pinker tells
about psychology about an incident in
psychology he writes quote a failure of
bayesian reasoning among scientists
themselves is a contributor to the
replicability crisis that we met in
chapter four the issue hit the fan in
2011 when the eminent social
psychologist daryl bem published the
results of nine experiments in the
prestigious journal of personality and
social psychology which claimed to show
that participants successfully predicted
at a rate above chance random events
before they took place such as which of
two curtains on a computer screen hid an
erotic image before the computer had
selected where to place it not
surprisingly the effects failed to
replicate but that was a foregone
conclusion given the infinitesimal prior
probability that a social psychologist
had disproven the laws of physics by
showing some undergraduates some porn
when i raised this point to a social
psychologist colleague he shot back
maybe pinker doesn't understand the laws
of physics but actual physicists like
sean carroll in his book the big picture
have explained why the laws of physics
really do rule out precognition and
other forms of esp the bem imbroglio
raised an uncomfortable question if a
preposterous claim could get published
in a prestigious journal by an eminent
psychologist using state-of-the-art
methods subject to rigorous peer review
what does that say about our standards
of prestige eminence rigor and the state
of the art
end quote pinker gives an answer his
answer is in terms of bayesian reasoning
um but
what we would say
is that
if you have a
observation an observation that defies
the laws of physics you have a problem
the problem could be that the laws of
physics are wrong
you've found a new law of physics or a
problem with the laws of physics or that
your experiment is wrong here's yet
another case another case
of where the experiment was wrong that's
all we don't need bayesian reasoning
we've just got a choice to make
we have to rule in favor of a particular
solution and if you had to bet
on the corpus of existing knowledge of
physical laws
or
this parochial psychology experiment
where do you go where do you put your
money i know where i'm putting my money
and
the important thing here
the key thing here the thing i think
that
pinker's work would be improved so much
by
and that bayesian reasoning would be
improved so much by all this this
so-called epistemology it's the simple
observation a very simple observation
but it does
take depth of understanding i guess that
this psychology experiment
that purported to show
prediction of random events before they
took place precognition esp
is explanationless
how
does it work
we aren't told we're just told we have
this observation that is consistent with
the existence of it
but no mechanism is given it's it's the
grass cure eat a kilogram of grass and
it'll cure your common cold
we don't need to do further experiments
to test this if we're not given an
explanation there's no reason to test it
again
there's a mistake somewhere someone's
making an error
you're controver you're claiming to
contravene the laws of physics without
explanation now
the crank of course turns around at that
point and says well you're all wrong my
experiment's right and the physics is
wrong but we are quite right everyone
else is quite right to say no you've
made an error somewhere we don't have
time to go figuring out where you've
made the error in your experiment but it
contravenes the prohibition on faster
than light travel what have you done
wrong
figure it out okay
of course these things are figured out
these things are error corrected
eventually by people who are interested
enough in looking into it but quite
often quite rightly many physicists who
are presented with a paper that claims
to have again disproven general
relativity or
shown how deutsch didn't understand
quantum computation or whatever the
the crank
may be claiming physicists professional
physicists and others don't always have
time to go reading the details of this
supposed theoretical refutation of some
long-standing physical law
it might be right the crank might be
right okay but the crank should
not be upset
if the physicist says they don't have
time to go investigating this issue any
more deeply the truth will out in the
end and the crank will be
shown
to be right
and they'll become famous because they
will have solved the problem but until
then
until then experimental results that
claim to violate laws of physics
need not be taken too seriously even if
they're done at the large hadron
collider much less in a
psychology lab somewhere
as
pinker points out there what he says is
the prestige eminence and rigor of
you know this journal and these
experiments
it's the wrong emphasis isn't it they
are doing science in form only no doubt
the paper had graphs statistics
it was published in this prestigious
journal but there's no explanation of
what's going on
that field not not just that paper but
whole
parts of the entire field are
explanations in psychology in
experiments like this where you find
correlation why does the correlation
exist no explanation so who cares
maybe you're regarded as a problem
but that's where the real science comes
in
just in finding correlations anyone can
find correlations
the best we can say for any of these
things sometimes is they throw up an
observation a problem that cries out for
explanation not yet known
but they're to a penny okay there's lots
of problems out there people could be
working on you're going out and finding
more trivial little psychological quirky
things who cares
find something interesting and fun but
you know people can spend their time on
whatever they want
finding out why people's memory is
improved after listening to classical
music as opposed to rock music well who
cares so when you have an
explanationless theory an explanation of
science
an explanationless hypothesis
you're not doing science you're going
through the processes of the scientific
method so-called
but in this particular case it's not
even you don't even have that much
forget about not being able to be
replicated without an explanation there
is not much to replicate i think it goes
on to say and i don't know
how much stock to put in this but he
says quote
most findings in psychology as it
happens do replicate
so
okay maybe he's right but does it come
with an explanation
as to why
the replication of these let's say
correlations why they're happening is it
in terms of memes and behavior
the ideas that people have what's going
on in minds
rather than being
behaviorism just observing that this
behavior is correlated with that
behavior what we want is an explanation
in terms of ideas that's what psychology
should be about psychology is the
science of the mind or one of the
sciences of the mind
a third person supposed
objective science of the mind
which should be a science of memes but
at the moment that is a just a a sort of
a fringe
a fringe area of study
i don't even know if psychology
psychologists themselves place much
stock in it okay let's keep going
skipping a fair bit and and pinger
actually speaks about yeah people like
cranks people who think that um
they've proved einstein wrong because
they've used some simple geometric
argument or something like that to
disprove relativity let's say
it would be very it's very surprising if
this kind of thing happens it would be
very surprising if someone in biology
was able to show that darwin was
fundamentally
wrong when it came to evolution by
natural selection and in fact there are
no mutations and there is no natural
selection something like that that would
be that would be astonishing to find
what pinker says about this sort of
thing he says quote the problem is that
surprising is a synonym for low prior
probability assuming that our cumulative
scientific understanding is not
worthless this means that even if the
quality of evidence is constant we
should have a lower credence and claims
that are surprising but the problem is
not just with the journalists end quote
so he's talking here about
you know the headlines that appear
headlines like was einstein wrong or
young upstart overturned scientific
apple card and so on and so forth
so
science journalists talk in these terms
all the time to try and drum up
excitement about reading the article
subscribing to the the magazine whatever
it happens to be
clicks
in this day and age of course
but it's not about probability again
it's not about assigning a low prior
probability to the new theory and a high
prior probability to the existing theory
that's not what we're doing
what we're doing in objective reality
and what we should be doing in
epistemology in rationality
is comparing side by side the
explanations
which is the better explanation which
accounts for the physical reality which
solves more problems if you have two
competing theories if the young upstart
genuinely comes along and says hey i've
disproved einstein how will look at my
unification of general relativity and
quantum mechanics
should we assign it a lower prior
probability no we seek to understand the
theory in its own terms it doesn't
matter what the probability people are
assigned why we are assigning
probabilities anyway what effect does
that have in reality on anything we can
act on the theory once we've assessed
the theory and in particular let's say
someone makes the quantum gravity
computer out of this new theory
well there you go
a demonstration it doesn't matter how
low the prior probability was this whole
way of thinking
does not track reality
or rationality at all
who's betting on these things why do we
need probabilities
if someone comes along and says i've got
the replacement for neodarwinism
i can improve on
how
what genes do how genes pass on
inherited characteristics
i've got something better
we assess the claim
against the existing theory
never mind probabilities
and in the ideal case we've got a
crucial test that we do an experiment
that rules out one of those theories
either the existing theory or the new
one
leaving us with just the one theory that
we know we then say we know we've got
that knowledge that's our best
scientific explanation that is our
scientific explanation the other one's
being ruled out again never mind
probabilities it doesn't come into it
who has ever talked in these terms
really
apart from people who write books such
as this one and philosophy papers okay
skipping
[Laughter]
excited about that it's just
it just i i want to know where
this kind of stuff is really being used
in actual science
there are physicists out there who call
themselves bayesian
i know some of them they've written
books
but
genuinely they're not using it
you ask these people you know when have
you last used bayes theorem in order to
make some progress in your work they
don't they just think that this is the
way that science is basically done that
it sort of tracks common sense no
insofar as it tracks common sense it's
tracking what's called critical
rationalism the ruling out of theories
objectively based upon evidence to hand
and
recourse to the best explanation
probabilities don't come into it
which is why bayesian reasoning is the
incorrect label
and if you're going to take the
probabilities out of bayesian reasoning
you don't have bayesian reasoning
anymore because that's what
that's what pays in reasoning is based
in reasoning without the probabilities
might very well be called critical
rationalism and maybe we can just
converge on that unless you think you
can still quantify truth in some way
then we part company okay let's keep
going
thinking right it's quite a healthy
respect for the boring will also improve
the quality of political commentary
in chapter one we saw that the track
records of many famous forecasters are
risible a big reason is that their
careers depend on attracting attention
with their riveting predictions which is
to say those with low priors and hence
assuming they lack the gift of prophecy
low posteriors
philip tetlock has studied super
forecasters who really do have good
track records at predicting economic and
political outcomes a common thread is
that they are bayesian they start with a
prior and update it from there ask to
provide the probability of a terrorist
attack within the next year for example
they'll first estimate a base rate by
going to wikipedia and counting the
number of attacks in the region in the
years proceeding not a practice you're
likely to see in the next op-ed you read
on what is in store for the world
end quote um
okay
super forecasters
super forecasters who can predict the
probability of a terrorist attack within
the next year in a certain place and
whether or not they get it right and
they look around the world at base rates
well look i can predict
terribly politically incorrect
but let's say i can predict that the
next big terror attack is not going to
take place
in downtown sydney
or in australia
we've kind of had one but yeah and i
think the next one's going to occur here
we know
we know don't we the the places where
these things happen and
who tends to
do these attacks
is this bayesian reasoning it's just
having a good explanation
of the causes of terrorist attacks and
the regions where they tend to happen
that's one thing as for super
forecasters more broadly in the economy
well we've talked about this before
the
super forecasters are using bayesian
racing
they might claim to be
but yeah as i've said like if you take
let's say
something like uh a thousand people
at the beginning of the 90s all of whom
claimed to be able to be great
predictors of the stock market and so
that each quarter they predict
whether the stock market will go up or
go down and if they're not correct then
presumably the subscribers to their
newsletter or whatever
who are
relying on them to know whether the
stock market's going to go up or go down
that the ones who don't get it right
well they lose their subscribers they
lose their job they go on to do
something else
by day
but the ones who by luck by chance are
right
quarter after quarter after quarter
they stay rich they earn fame for
guessing right
now does this rule out the existence of
people who really do have good
explanations that the rest of us don't
know about no it doesn't maybe they do
exist but
i think if you're going to bet
on what the genuine explanation is here
the genuine explanation is that some
people are lucky especially when it
comes to predicting
broad trends in the stock market
and you know getting
you know fi these five quarters in a row
have been shown growth
and then this one is in decline and then
we'll have growth again for three and
decline again for one and then growth
again for four and decline again for one
and growth again for six and decline
again for two okay now that pattern is
something like what the real stock
market goes through but getting it
actually right
specifically to the quarter every single
quarter it's astonishingly
lucky guesswork
lucky guesswork because the stock market
hit is inherently unpredictable because
people make choices but if you are lucky
then of course you're going to look back
to the past it's induction right you're
going to look back in the past and go ah
look at how right i was i have the
special knowledge rather than simply
being lucky
you're incorrectly attributing
knowledge where there's ignorance
it's luck
in those cases it really is luck
which i guess a lot of people who
predict the stock market wouldn't like
to hear and super forecasters don't want
to hear and i agree with pinker
the track records of many of them are
risible even famous ones who keep their
job who's that fellow on cnn kramer who
is the finance guy and he
consistently gets it wrong says the
stock market's going to go up and it
goes down it says it's going to go down
and it goes up he's hopeless he's still
there
giving financial advice to people and
they're following it i mean
it's astonishing yeah but most are wrong
and and we do have and pinker kind of
you know talks about riveting
predictions
um
but riveting yeah yeah riveting as in
scary as in things will go wrong
typically okay here's here's the profit
telling you all the bad ways that the
world's going to fall to rack and ruin
we've talked about it before but all of
that can be discussed
the success or failure of people
forecasting staff whether they have good
explanations or not whether they're
lucky or not and their failures without
resorting to bayesian reasoning
and priors and posteriors and
probabilities it's just knowledge it's
just whether or not people know things
or they don't know things and get lucky
by guessing rolling the dice the
metaphorical dice
okay skipping over a bit more the next
section is called forbidden base rates
and bayesian taboo
and second paragraph reads quote the
stage for forbidden base rates is set by
a law of social science measure any
socially significant variable test
scores vocational interests social trust
income marriage rates life habits rates
of different types of violence street
crime gang crime domestic violence
organized crime terrorism now break down
the results by the standard demographic
dividers age sex race religion ethnicity
the averages for the different subgroups
are never the same and sometimes the
differences are large
whether the differences arise from
nature culture discrimination history or
some combination is beside the point the
differences are there end quote
indeed now the rest of
this chapter basically no the rest of
this section basically is devoted
entirely to discussing
all of the
hazards in discussing precisely those
things you know how there's different
types of violence and different levels
of violence
based on
age sex race religion and ethnicity for
example
and
some of us i guess have tapped out on
this
so many people are talking about it it's
like everyone with a podcast now is
talking about this kind of stuff
how to break down people into their
little categories of race ethnicity
gender
so on
and then what are the average features
what are the generalizations you can
make
were the stereotypes and indeed what are
the statistics
sometimes you might want to know if
you're a police officer
you want to be able to know what the
statistics are for some of these things
you want to be able to understand some
of this stuff so you can solve problems
but people still need to be treated as
individuals
in a broader political sense
it is not good
to be focusing so much on the
differences between groups of people
we should focus on the individuals this
this this whole thing is some people's
entire shtick
this is all that some people seem to
talk about now and
i think many of us just get bored with
it you know you
the rational thing to do is to treat
people as individuals
if you're engaged in something where
you're required to deal with groups
you want to understand let's say crime
statistics then yes this data will be
interested interesting but
other than this it seems like there's
two groups have arisen in the
intellectual zeitgeist of the year
2020s anyway and during the 2020s you're
either interested in group differences
and you want to write papers on it or
you want to defend the people who do
or you want to call anyone who does this
or interested in defending this racist
the third option is of course
who cares okay modulo people losing
their jobs over this stuff and you know
like i said crime statistics for cops
pages devoted to the issue
often have been beaten to death over the
last few decades
there exists group differences between
people it's in politic to say it so it
shouldn't be in politic to say but
anyway
who really needs to know maybe insurance
companies as well insurance companies
need to know this stuff as well but
other than that it's not a huge
political issue but people are turning
it into a huge political issue they're
being hyperbolic about it
both about i should be allowed to talk
about group differences and
you're racist if you're talking about
group differences
i think both sides of this debate can
kind of um
you know relax
so pinker goes on to discuss all the
different ways to talk about this and
all the different kinds of human
irrationality i think i broadly agree
with what he's saying you know namely
racism bad um so i'm skipping through
that it's just a thing that
i you know this podcast seeks to be
timeless and i think that
this particular
strand of certain kind of racism and
focus on race is
timely it's it's a feature of
the late 20 teens and early 2020s for
now hopefully it passes quickly okay
skipping two um i think it is the last
section
and the last section is titled
bayesian after all
quote
for all our taboos neglects and
stereotypes it's a mistake to write off
our kind as hopelessly unbayesian
recall that the san abazians requiring
that spore be definitive before
inferring it was left by a rarer species
gigarenzo has argued that sometimes
ordinary people are on solid
mathematical grounds when they appear to
be flouting vase's rule mathematicians
themselves complain that social
scientists often use statistical
formulas mindlessly they plug in numbers
turn a crank and assume that the correct
answer pops out in reality a statistical
formula is only as good as the
assumptions behind it lay people can be
sensitive to those assumptions and
sometimes when they appear to be blowing
off beta's rule they may just be
exercising the caution that a good
mathematician would advise end quote
so sometimes our species might be
regarded as hopelessly unbased in
or good bayesians
but you know the normative statement
here is you should want to be a better
bayesian
which is so literally something that
nick bostrom says
what probability do we assign
to
the claim
baze's epistemology is true
what's that how do we know
does it only apply to science and
physical stuff or can it be turned in on
itself
if so how what if we think we're
rational and we're not we refuse
to agree to be a better bayesian because
we think that bayesianism itself is
irrational because it doesn't track
reality because probability is just a
quirky area of mathematics originally
designed for gambling and even then it
doesn't apply what do we say i don't
know
pinker goes on here in this
part of the chapter it's quite rightly
talk about how well let's just read
let's just read okay he writes quote
because there is no correct prior in ba
in a bayesian problem people's departure
from the base rate provided by an
experimenter is not necessarily a
fallacy take the taxi cab problem where
the prize were proportions of blue and
green taxes in the city the participants
may well have thought that this simple
baseline would be swamped by more
specific differences like companies
accident rates the number of their cabs
driving during the day and night in the
neighborhood they serve
and quote so on and so forth so yes this
idea of base rate where you start with
your priors
pinker says there's no correct prior
in a bayesian problem exactly
exactly
so
this is not objective
he's even put the word correct in scare
quotes
admitting fully this is not objective
this is subjective this is your opinion
there is nothing correct about it it's
relativist even if there's no fact of
the matter there's no way of being
correct here it's just what you think
you personally think should go in as the
number to be substituted into basis now
and then you update
where's our objective knowledge here
papa wrote the book on objective
knowledge even the objectivists
of the iran style should object to this
it's not tracking reality it's tracking
beliefs personal credences your
credibility you think is in
the prior
which you just make up
especially if you're a subject matter
expert you just make it up but even a
lay person with hold there can just make
it up
pink is admitting himself there's no
correct prior and amazing problem and he
goes on to discuss it i agree with
everything he says he doesn't see it as
a refutation of this entire perspective
on knowledge
i do
there are better ways
what is called critical rationalism what
is called popular in epistemology is
the way we understand how knowledge
works and is the way in which we can
understand how decisions can be made
once you have the good explanation
and absent a good explanation you don't
know
and so you better get about creating a
solution
so that you can know and if you need to
make a decision right now in the absence
of good information then you better use
your intuitions
and you better hone them
but through training and whatever else
if you're a doctor or a police officer
or a military person and so on and so
forth the remainder of the
of the
section and the chapter
is
a reasonable exploration more of bazel's
theorem itself and he goes into
talking about how you can even visualize
basis theorem um
the the youtube channel three blue one
brown
uses the same method i don't know if
pinker got it from them
but it's a very very good one if you
want to have a
a more intuitive understanding of basis
theorem a visual way of representing
basis theorem
then yeah go to youtube three blue one
brown look up basis theorem and he goes
through with animations explaining the
stuff which might be a better way to go
if you're so inclined
after
me pouring scorn all over bayes's uh
theorem the usefulness of bazel serum uh
usually in extremely extremely limited
situations
something let me just read the
conclusion of this chapter and we'll
call it a day
thinker says quote
by tapping pre-existing intuitions and
translating information into
mind-friendly formats it's possible to
hone people's statistical reasoning whom
we must
risk literacy is essential for doctors
judges policy makers and others who hold
our lives in their hands and since we
all live in a world in which god plays
dice fluency in bayesian reasoning and
other forms of statistical competence is
a public good that should be a priority
in education
the principles of cognitive psychology
suggest that it's better to work with
the rationality of people have and
enhance it further than to write off the
majority of our species as
chronologically crippled by fallacies
and biases the principles of democracy
suggest that too end quote just for fun
let's go through and see how many
clauses i can disagree with
he begins with by tapping pre-existing
intuitions and translating information
into mind-friendly formats it's possible
to hone people's statistical reasoning
well it might be possible to hone their
ability to identify and correct errors
that's what i think is a better way of
looking at this when we must he says no
you mustn't you don't you don't have to
do anything at all
you can you can have different interests
risk literacy is essential for doctors
judges policymakers and others who hold
our lives in their hands
well insofar as
being concerned about risks
is essential for those it's essential
for every individual as well handing
over your risk literacy handing over
your
concern about your life to experts like
doctors judges policy makers and others
is the incorrect way to think about
things going into partnership with your
doctor is the best way to go
having a trying to come to a good
understanding of what it is you need
from your doctor or your lawyer or your
politician is the best way to go
not handing over and seeding your
individuality and your brain your mind
to the authorities so that you don't
have to think anymore you need to
hone your capacity to identify and
correct errors to have
relevant knowledge
when you need it
his next sentence and since we all live
in a world in which god plays dice no we
don't
god does not play dice
things
are determined subjectively you don't
know what's going to happen next
objectively god doesn't play dice
everything's determined by the laws of
quantum theory
fluency in bayesian reasoning and other
forms of competence is a public good
no it's not that should be a priority in
education no it shouldn't no it
shouldn't
it is complete
misconception
i don't think anything should be
enforced in public education i know that
i disagree with the public intellectuals
on this no doubt pinker is i would guess
has himself a long list of things that
he would put into the public education
system a long list of things he would
take out as every single expert who ever
opines on education almost has the poor
little kids need to learn this that and
the other because i'm an expert i'm an
authority i know how they can think
better
even if their prescription is you've got
to learn bayes's theorem so you can be a
better thinker when basis theorem is
invalid in almost all situations
better
to go down socrates road
you know
if i know anything at all it's that i
don't know
better to be that person better to be
that kind of intellectual that you don't
know best that be humble enough be
modest enough to say i don't know best
and i'm not going to force
whatever it is my vision of rationality
onto the children
because i could be wrong
let them explore this topic of
rationality that might be a way to go
before we start enforcing particular
things
yeah school shouldn't be compulsory but
so long as it remains so why not just
have a big library
of all different approaches to
rationality
if that's what you want maybe they're
not interested in learning
rationality it doesn't sound
particularly exciting
for a child the principles of cognitive
psychology suggest it's better to work
with the rationality people have and
enhance it further than to write off the
majority of our species as
chronologically crippled by fallacies
and biases
who's writing off the majority of our
species is chronologically crippled by
fallacies and by who's doing this who
apart from
the intellectuals
i don't think the majority of our
species is chronologically crippled
we make mistakes these fallacies and
biases they're just errors they're just
things that we do wrong and everyone's
prone to making errors it's part of
creating knowledge it goes on to say the
principles of democracy suggest that too
and this is the appeal for well you've
got to learn how to vote correctly
we can't be a functioning democracy if
people keep voting the wrong way
this is the style of intellectualism
that i am allergic to
it
smell what what do they say intention
has a smell i think jocko willing was
saying that recently you can pretend
or intention has an odor
you can pretend or you like that you're
just being completely reasonable
but if you've got a political bias it
comes through you know
it has a smell it has a murder
and i think we should just leave people
free does that have an odor
it should it it's the odor of leave
everyone be to make their own way in the
world to learn understand and correct
their errors that there is no royal road
to knowledge there's no royal road to
progress there's no royal road to an
error-free situation
there's no way
of being
more rational except correcting errors
learning how to best correct errors and
popular epistemology is the best way to
go there
okay until next time bye-bye